THE FIRST LIGHT OF DAWN
IS THE BEST TIME TO SET
MIST NETS.
SCOTT EDWARDS IS A HARVARD
PROFESSOR WHO STUDIES BIRD
EVOLUTION.
HE'S COME WITH HIS
STUDENTS TO AUSTRALIA TO
CATCH BIRDS IN THE FIELD.
SCOTT EDWARDS: BIRDS
ARE A WONDERFUL TOOL FOR
STUDYING EVOLUTION ON
MANY DIFFERENT LEVELS.
AMAZING.
BRIGHT IRIDESCENT BLUE
PLUMAGE ON THE HEAD THERE.
HE TEACHES THE
WAY HE WAS TAUGHT.
SCOTT EDWARDS: I TRY
TO BROADEN THE STUDENTS
PERSPECTIVES AND FORCETHEM TTHINK A
DOES YOUR SPECIES FIT
INTO THE BROADER PICTURE?
HOW DO THE TOOLS THAT
YOU USE ENABLE OTHER
BIOLOGISTS TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR
SPECIES?
SCOTT EDWARDS: THIS
IS A SPINY-CHEEKED
HONEYEATER, A
REPRESENTATIVE OF A HUGE
RADIATION OF NECTAR
FEEDING BIRDS IN
AUSTRALIA.
SCOTT AND HIS STUDENTS
ARE CHARACTERS IN A
REMARKABLE STORY, THE
ONGOING LEGACY OF THE MAN
WHO GAVE SCIENCE NEW WAYS
TO UNDERSTAND HOW THE
DIVERSITY OF LIFE ON
EARTH EVOLVED, BERKELEY
PROFESSOR ALLAN WILSON.
SCOTT EDWARDS: ALLAN
HAD A WAY OF HAVING YOU
FOCUS ON THE BIG PICTURE,
HAVING YOU ASK OF THE BIG
QUESTIONS.
EVEN IF YOU'RE STUDYING
A RELATIVELY OBSCURE
SPECIES, HE HAD A WAY
OF BRINGING OUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF THAT SPECIES
TO THE BROADER PICTURE OF
EVOLUTION.
FROM HIS LAB AT
BERKELEY, ALLAN CHANGED
HOW WE STUDY THE EVOLUTION
OF ALL CREATURES.
BUT HIS MOST CONTROVERSIAL
CONTRIBUTIONS WERE TO THE
STORY OF OUR OWN SPECIES.
SANDRA HOLLIMAN: WE'RE
GOING TO BE TALKING ABOUT
THE LEGACY OF A RESEARCHER
WHO WAS HERE AT BERKELEY
FOR PRETTY MUCH HIS
ENTIRE CAREER, WHO WAS
A NATIVE OF NEW ZEALAND
BUT A MEMBER OF THE
BERKELEY COMMUNITY BY
CHOICE, AND MADE A
TREMENDOUS IMPACT IN THE
FIELD THAT YOU'RE STUDYING
HERE, PHYSICAL
ANTHROPOLOGY.
HERE AT THE BERKELEY
CAMPUS, THIS GENTLEMAN,
PROFESSOR ALLAN WILSON,
BEGAN HIS DOCTORAL
STUDIES.
AND HE LAID A FOUNDATION
IN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY THAT
THEN WOULD INFILTRATE
ALL OF THE BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES.
HIS INNOVATION REALLY
SHOOK THE FOUNDATION OF
WHAT WE UNDERSTOOD
ABOUT HUMAN EVOLUTION.
OR MORE TO THE POINT, WHAT
WE THOUGHT WE UNDERSTOOD
ABOUT HUMAN EVOLUTION.
JIM PATTON: WHEN HE
TALKED TO YOU, YOU KNOW,
HE BORED RIGHT INTO YOUR
BRAIN AND IT ALMOST HURT.
SVANTE PAABO: SO HE
ASKED THE RIGHT QUESTIONS,
THE QUESTIONS THAT YOU
COULD ACTUALLY GET A
HANDLE ON.
TOM WHITE: I THINK MOST
SCIENTISTS TODAY VIEW ALL
OF THEIR WORK IN ANY OF
THE BIOLOGIES AS RESTING
ON A SOLID FOUNDATION OF
EVOLUTION AND MOLECULAR
EVOLUTION.
AND ALLAN, YOU KNOW, IS
ONE OF THE GIANTS OF THE
MOLECULAR EVOLUTION FIELD.
THE ALLAN WILSON STORY
STARTS IN THE SOUTH
PACIFIC, IN NEW ZEALAND.
HERE FOLLOWING MILLIONS OF
YEARS OF ISOLATION UNIQUE
SPECIES OF BIRDS
HAD EVOLVED.
ALLAN WAS BORN IN 1934.
HE GREW UP ON A DAIRY
FARM NEAR AUCKLAND.
HIS FATHER CHARLIE WAS THE
SON OF AN IRISH MIGRANT.
HIS MOTHER EUNICE WAS A
CARPENTER'S DAUGHTER.
THEY ENCOURAGED
INDEPENDENT THINKING AND
PARTICIPATION IN
THE FARM CHORES.
ALLAN'S BROTHER GARY STILL
RUNS CATTLE ON THE FARM
WHERE THEY GREW UP.
GARY WILSON: THE FARM
WAS VERY MUCH A NATURAL
AND COMFORTABLE
ENVIRONMENT FOR US.
THOUGH YOU HAD JOBS --
FEEDING COWS, FEEDING
PIGS, CASTRATING THE
PIGS, DEHORNING THE YOUNG
CALVES.
THAT WAS OUR WORLD.
AND IT WAS A MIXTURE
OF RECREATION, WE
WERE GALLOPING AROUND
THESE PADDOCKS AND OFF
INTO THE DRAIN AND DOWN IN
THE CULVERT, GOING UNDER
THE RAILWAY LINE AND
OFF INTO THE BUSH.
CATCHING CRAWLIES AND
TROUT AND TRYING TO
CATCH EELS.
I THINK PROBABLY THE
ASSUMPTION, BOTH OF US
CERTAINLY WOULD
GROW UP AS FARMERS.
BUT ALREADY ALLAN'S
CURIOSITY ABOUT EVOLUTION
SET HIM APART FROM
OTHER RURAL YOUNGSTERS,
INCLUDING THOSE WHO WENT
WITH HIM TO THE LOCAL
SUNDAY SCHOOL.
GARY WILSON: THERE WAS
A VICAR AND HIS WIFE.
SHE WAS IMPRESSED BY
ALLAN'S QUESTIONING,
PARTICULARLY OVER THE
STORY OF EVOLUTION OR THE
CREATION OF THE WORLD.
AND SHE WAS PARTICULARLY
STRUCK BY THE KIND OF MIND
HE HAD THAT WAS SO
PERSISTENT AND SO
DETERMINED TO FIND
SATISFACTORY ANSWERS.
THE VICAR AND HIS WIFE HAD
CLOSE ASSOCIATIONS WITH
KING'S COLLEGE, ABOUT
20 MILES NORTH OF US.
A FAIRLY ELITE AND
PRIVILEGED SCHOOL AND ONE
THAT WE NORMALLY WOULDN'T
HAVE HAD ANY ASSOCIATION
WITH WHATSOEVER.
THE VICAR'S WIFE
PERSUADED ALLAN'S MOTHER
TO ENROLL HIM AT
KING'S COLLEGE.
THERE HE DISCOVERED HE
COULD HOLD HIS OWN WITH
BOYS FROM AFFLUENT CITY
FAMILIES IN THE CLASSROOM
AND ON THE SPORTS FIELD.
IN THE LATE 1940'S SCIENCE
HAD NO ANSWERS TO THE
EVOLUTIONARY QUESTIONS
THAT PUZZLED YOUNG ALLAN.
AND THE QUESTIONS WEREN'T
EVEN RAISED BY THE MASTERS
WHO TAUGHT CHEMISTRY
AND BIOLOGY.
THE SUBJECT OF
EVOLUTION WASN'T BROACHED
BY BIOLOGY TEACHERS
AT THAT TIME.
I LEARNED ABOUT IT BY
MISSING THE TRAIN BACK
HOME ONE EVENING AND
FINDING THE LIBRARY WAS A
PLACE THAT WAS WARM AND
I COULD STAY WAITING FOR
SEVERAL HOURS.
THERE WAS AN OLD BOOK
THERE ON EVOLUTION, WHICH
WAS A MIND OPENER FOR ME.
HERE WE COULD BE LEARNING
ABOUT BIOLOGY WITHOUT
LEARNING ABOUT THE PROCESS
THAT WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR
DIVERSITY AND DIVERSE
TYPES OF CREATURES
ONE SEES.
STUDYING EVOLUTION WAS
NOT SEEN BY ALLAN AS A
CAREER OPTION
IN THE 1950'S.
HE SAW HIS FUTURE
COMBINING FARMING WITH
SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES.
ALLAN WILSON: I COME
FROM A FAMILY THAT HAD
NEVER HAD ANY MEMBERS
WHO'D EVER GONE TO
UNIVERSITY.
HE ENROLLED AT OTAGO
IN SOUTHERN NEW ZEALAND.
IT WAS THEARTHEST
UNIVERSITY FROM HIS HOME
AND THE ONLY ONE THAT
OFFERED AN ECATION IN
BIOCHEMISTRY.
ALLAN WILSON: ONE OF
THE THINGS THAT I SUPPOSE
MOLDED MY CAREER WAS
HAVING AN INTEREST BOTH IN
ZOOLOGY AND IN
BIOCHEMISTRY.
IT WAS UNUSUAL FOR
STUDENTS TO BE ABLE TO
MAJOR IN BOTH OF THOSE
SUBJECTS AT THE SAME TIME.
AROUND THE OTAGO
PENINSULA ALLAN CONTINUED
TO PURSUE HIS
INTEREST IN BIRDS.
ALLAN WILSON: NATURAL
HISTORY AND BIOCHEMISTRY
WERE SEPARATE SUBJECTS AND
THE PROFESSORS WERE SO FAR
APART IN THEIR POINTS OF
VIEW THAT THEY COULDN'T
DISCUSS THE COMMON
INTERESTS IN EVOLUTION
TOGETHER.
THE BIOCHEMISTS KNEW TOO
LITTLE ABOUT THE BIOLOGY
OF ORGANISMS AND THE
ZOOLOGISTS HAD TOO LITTLE
TRAINING IN CHEMISTRY
TO EVEN GET TOGETHER.
AND SO IT SEEMED LOGICAL
THAT A STUDENT LIKE ME
SHOULD CONTINUE TRYING
TO BRIDGE THIS GAP BY
RECEIVING TRAINING
IN BOTH FIELDS.
AND I INSISTED ON
STRADDLING THAT DUAL PATH
AS I WENT TO
HIGHER EDUCATION.
TO FOLLOW THAT DUAL
PATH ALLAN KNEW HE HAD TO
LEAVE NEW ZEALAND.
A ZOOLOGY PROFESSOR,
DONALD FARNER, WHO WAS
VISITING OTAGO INVITED
HIM TO AMERICA.
AT THE PULLMAN CAMPUS
OF WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY HE STUDIED
UNDER FARNER FOR HIS
MASTERS.
SOON AFTER HE ARRIVED
ALLAN WAS BEFRIENDED BY A
YOUNG FACULTY MEMBER,
LEONARD KIRSCHNER.
LEN KIRSHNER: I CAN'T
CONCEIVE OF TWO MORE
DISPARATE PERSONALITIES
THAN THIS FAIRLY RIGID
SENIOR PROFESSOR AND THAT
PRETTY LAID BACK YOUNG
NEW ZEALANDER.
THERE WERE TIMES WHEN THE
PERSONALITIES WOULD CLASH.
ONCE THEY WERE DISCUSSING
SOMETHING ABOUT THE
EVOLUTION OF BIRDS, ALLAN
MADE A STATEMENT LIKE
"I'M GOING SOMEDAY TO
SOLVE EVOLUTION."
I HEARD ABOUT THIS FROM
FARNER, BECAUSE HE CAME
INTO MY OFFICE JUST
FURIOUS THAT ANYBODY COULD
MAKE SUCH A STATEMENT, LET
ALONE A 20-YEAR-OLD WET
BEHIND THE EARS STUDENT.
THE YOUNG WILSON
MEANT BUSINESS.
ALLAN KNEW THAT AMERICA
OFFERED HIM THE BEST
CHANCE TO ACHIEVE
HIS AMBITION.
HE CAREFULLY CHOSE
BERKELEY FOR HIS PH.D.
IN BIOCHEMISTRY.
AND THERE HE MARRIED
LEONA GREENBAUM.
LEONA WILSON: I WAS
VERY ATTRACTED TO HIM.
BECAUSE HE SEEMED TO ME TO
BE AMAZINGLY IMAGINATIVE.
AND HE WAS VERY
EXCITED BECAUSE HE HAD
THIS DREAM THAT HE WANTED
TO WORK ON EVOLUTION, AND
THERE WEREN'T VERY MANY
PEOPLE WHO WERE WORKING ON
THAT AT THE TIME.
I MEAN, NOT THE WAY HE
WANTED TO LOOK AT IT,
BIOCHEMICALLY.
ANALYZE THE MOLECULES.
THE THINGS HE WAS
THINKING OF WERE AMAZING.
FOR HIS POST DOCTORAL
STUDY HE WENT TO BRANDEIS
UNIVERSITY IN BOSTON.
HE RETURNED TO BERKELEY
AS A MEMBER OF THE
BIOCHEMISTRY FACULTY.
BUT HE WAS STILL
FOLLOWING A DUAL PATH.
ONE OF HIS FAVORITE HAUNTS
WAS BERKELEY'S MUSEUM OF
VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY.
DAVID WAKE: WELL WHAT
BROUGHT ALLAN TO THE
MUSEUM OF VERTEBRATE
ZOOLOGY WAS OUR COLLECTION
OF BIRDS.
AND WE HAVE LOTS OF BIRDS.
AND ALLAN WAS A
STUDENT OF BIRDS.
HE WAS INTERESTED IN THEIR
EVOLUTION AND HE WAS
INTERESTED IN THEIR
RELATIONSHIPS.
AND HE WANTED TO KNOW IN
SOME QUANTITATIVE WAY HOW
THEY HAD EVOLVED.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE
BIOCHEMISTRY CAME IN.
ALLAN KNEW THAT
OVER MILLIONS OF YEARS
MUTATIONS IN THE GENES
THAT CODE FOR PROTEINS
ACCUMULATE AT REMARKABLY
STEADY RATES AS SPECIES
DIVERGE FROM A
COMMON ANCESTOR.
HE REALIZED HE COULD
READ THE PROTEINS IN THE
TISSUES OF THE DIVERGING
SPECIES AS HISTORICAL
DOCUMENTS.
THE GREATER THE
DIFFERENCES THAT HAD
ACCUMULATED IN THE SPECIES
AS THEY DIVERGED, THE
LONGER THEY HAD
BEEN SEPARATED.
THIS RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TIME AND GENETIC CHANGE
CAST A WHOLE NEW
LIGHT ON EVOLUTION.
DAVID WAKE: NOW MANY
BIOLOGISTS REACTED VERY
NEGAVELY TO THAT.
OTHERS SAW IT AS INSPIRED
AND SOMETHING THAT THEY
COULD BUILD ON.
AND SO ALLAN BECAME
SOMETHING OF A
LIGHTNING ROD.
SANDRA HOLLIMAN:
AN ALLAN WILSON'S
CONTRIBUTION WAS TO
DEVELOP WHAT HAS COME TO
BE REFERRED TO AS
A MOLECULAR CLOCK.
HIS INNOVATION, FIRST
WORKING WITH MAMMALIAN
SPECIES GENERALLY AND THEN
SPECIFICALLY FOCUSING ON
CONTEMPORARY HUMANS,
CHIMPS AND GORILLAS, WAS
TO DETERMINE WITH THE
LIVING SPECIES HOW MANY
GENETIC DIFFERENCES THERE
WERE FROM ONE TO ANOTHER.
AND THEN BEING ABLE TO
EXTRAPOLATE FROM THAT A
TIME THAT WE PRESUME
THAT THEY DIVERGED.
BUT WHEN HE STARTED
TALKING ABOUT THE
EVOLUTION OF HUMANS IN
THIS PERSPECTIVE IT
REALLY, REALLY BECAME
VERY, VERY NOTEWORTHY AND
VERY CONTROVERSIAL.
HE COLLABORATED WITH
PROFESSOR VINCENT SARICH
FROM THE ANTHROPOLOGY
DEPARTMENT ON THIS CAMPUS.
AND IN 1967 THEY
PUBLISHED THEIR WORK.
VINCE SARICH: HE WAS A
PROFESSOR IN BIOCHEMISTRY.
I WAS IN MY LATER STAGES
AS A GRADUATE STUDENT IN
ANTHROPOLOGY.
AND WE GOT TOGETHER
WITH T IDEA OF
SORTING THINGS OUT WITH
THE MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES
WHICH WERE THEN JUST
BECOMING AVAILABLE AND
WORKING OUT FROM THE
MOLECULAR DATA SOMETHING
ABOUT THE COURSE OF
EVOLUTION OF OURSELVES.
SCIENTISTS HAD KNOWN
SINCE DARWIN THAT CHIMPS
ARE OUR CLOSEST RELATIVES.
THE QUESTION WAS, HOW LONG
AGO DID WE DIVERGE FROM
THE COMMON ANCESTOR THAT
WE ONCE SHARED WITH THEM?
PALEONTOLOGISTS THOUGHT
THEY HAD THE ANSWER IN THE
FOSSILIZED JAWBONES
OF A SPEES KNOWN AS
RAMAPITHECUS.
IT WAS 15 MILLION
YEARS OLD.
THE SHAPE OF ITS JAWS
SUGGESTED THAT THIS
PRIMATE WAS A HOMINID ON
THE DIRECT EVOLUTIONARY
LINE TO MODERN HUMANS.
IF RAMAPITHECUS WAS
ALREADY A HOMINID THE
HUMAN LINEAGE MUST HAVE
DIVERGED FROM OTHER APES
BEFORE 15 MILLION
YEARS AGO.
VINCE SARICH: ALLAN AND
I DECIDED THAT WHAT WE
NEEDED WAS A DIFFERENT WAY
OF TACKLING THE PROBLEM.
WE COULD TAKE, LET'S SAY
ALBUMIN FROM ME, INJECT IT
INTO A RABBIT.
HARVEST THE ANTIBODIES
FROM THE RABBIT SOME WEEKS
DOWN THE LINE.
AND THEN USE THOSE
ANTIBODIES TO REACT WITH
MY ALBUMIN, CHIMP ALBUMIN
AND SO FORTH AND SO ON
DOWN THE LINE.
WE SAID, WELL LET'S LOOK
AT THE SITUATION WITH THE
MOLECULES.
WHAT WILL THE MOLECULES
BE ABLE TO TELL US?
WELL HOPEFULLY THEY'LL
BE ABLE TO TELL US IN AN
OBJECTIVE COUNTABLE
FASHION HOW DIFFERENT
FORMS ARE FROM ONE
ANOTHER, HOW LONG DID IT
TAKE THEM TO GET THAT
DIFFERENT FROM ONE
ANOTHER, AND WHAT SHOULD
THEY CHANGE INTO.
THIS SET OF SIX TUBES
REPRESENTS HOW WE DID THE
WORK THAT WE DID EARLY ON.
NOW WHAT ALLAN AND I WERE
DOING HERE WAS USING THE
PRESENT TO LOOK
AT THE PAST.
THE PRESENT IS REPRESENTED
HERE BY VARIOUS BLOOD
SAMPLES FROM VARIOUS
PRIMATE SPECIES.
THE RED COLOR
IS HEMOGLOBIN.
AND THE AMOUNT OF
HEMOGLOBIN PRODUCED IS A
FUNCTION OF THE STRENGTH
OF THE ANTIGEN ANTIBODY
REACTION.
MORE COLOR -- LESS
DISTANCE BETWEEN THE
SPECIES.
BUT HERE THE HUMAN AND
CHIMP ARE VIRTUALLY
IDENTICAL.
AND THE OTHERS GO
DOWN THE LINE HERE.
MINE.
CHIMP'S.
RHESUS MONKEY'S.
SPIDER MONKEY'S.
LEMUR.
DOG.
THESE COMPARISONS
SHOWED THAT THE GENETIC
DISTANCE BETWEEN HUMANS
AND CHIMPS WAS ONLY 1/6TH
OF THE DISTANCE BETWEEN
HUMANS AND THE OLD WORLD
MONKEYS.
APES AND THESE OLD WORLD
MONKEYS WERE THOUGHT TO
HAVE DIVERGED 30
MILLION YEARS AGO.
SO SARICH AND WILSON
CALCULATED THAT THE DATE
WHEN HUMANS AND CHIMPS
DIVERGED MUST BE 1/6TH OF
30 MILLION, OR ONLY
5 MILLION YEARS AGO.
IF THEY WERE RIGHT, THE
PALEONTOLOGISTS' THEORY
THAT RAMAPITHECUS WAS ON
THE DIRECT LINE TO MODERN
HUMANS HAD TO BE WRONG.
VINCE SARICH: AND THE
ISSUE THEN WAS, WELL WHAT
IS RAMAPITHECUS?
ARE YOU SUGGESTING THAT
YOU CAN TELL US IT'S NOT A
HOMINID BECAUSE YOUR TEST
TUBES TELL YOU SOMETHING?
AND THE ANSWER FROM US
WAS YES, ABSOLUTELY.
AND THAT WAS
THE BIG PROBLEM.
DAVID WAKE: IT WAS
HOT STUFF RIGHT FROM THE
BEGINNING.
AND FAMOUS PAPERS BY
SARICH AND WILSON, WILSON
AND SARICH REALLY STARTED
OFF A WHOLE ROUND OF
FURIOUS DEBATE ABOUT
HOW WE SHOULD MEASURE
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG
CLOSE RELATIVES.
HIS MOVEMENT INTO
PALEOANTHROPOLOGY IN THE
LATE 60S TOTALLY, I MEAN,
REVERSED DECADES AND
DECADES AND DECADES
OF THINKING ABOUT THE
DIVERSIFICATION
OF PRIMATES.
VINCE SARICH: WHAT WAS
RADICAL WAS THE IDEA THAT
YOU COULD GET DIVERGENCE
TIMES AMONG LINEAGES,
AMONG ORGANISMS, WITHOUT
REFERENCE TO THE FOSSIL
RECORD.
AND THAT WAS
REVOLUTIONARY.
JIM PATTON: THE TIME
PERSPECTIVE THAT WE HAD
CAME SOLELY FROM
THE FOSSIL RECORD.
AND AS BOTH VINCE SARICH
AND ALLAN WILSON USED TO
SAY, WE KNOW OUR MOLECULES
HAD ANCESTORS, BUT YOU
DON'T KNOW THAT YOUR
FOSSILS HAD DESCENDENTS.
IT WORKED.
IT MADE SENSE.
BUT IT WAS A COMPLETE
SHIFT IN THINKING.
SO ALLAN AND VINCE WERE
OUT IN THE WORLD AS TWO
LONELY VOICES IN THE
WILDERNESS ON THIS THEME.
THE PEOPLE THAT WERE
VIEWED BY THE PUBLIC AS
BEING IN CHARGE OF
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT EVOLUTION
AND SPECIFICALLY ABOUT
HUMAN EVOLUTION, THEY WERE
PEOPLE WHO HAD NO
TRAINING IN BIOCHEMISTRY.
AND IT SEEMED SO
IMPOSSIBLE THAT WE COULD
BE TELLING THEM WHEN THE
COMMON ANCESTORS LIVED
WITHOUT EVER DIGGING
FOR A FOSSIL.
DAVID WAKE: WHAT DO
THESE BIOCHEMISTS THINK
THEY CAN DO, COME IN AND
TELL US OUR BUSINESS?
YOU KNOW, IT'S OUR
BUSINESS TO DO THIS.
THIS IS WHAT
WE DO ALL DAY.
AND THEY'RE JUST PLAYING
AT AND THEY'RE NOT TAKING
THIS SERIOUSLY.
THAT WAS THE REACTION
OF THE PALEONTOLOGISTS.
ALLAN CONTINUED TO
STAND UP FOR THE DATE HE
AND SARICH HAD CALCULATED.
AND HE WAS ALREADY
THINKING A STEP AHEAD.
IF THE MOLECULES OF HUMANS
AND CHIMPS ARE SO SIMILAR,
WHY DO WE LOOK
SO DIFFERENT?
HE ASKED MARY-CLAIRE
KING TO FIND OUT.
MARY-CLAIRE KING: ALLAN
SUGGESTED THAT I COMPARE
HUMANS AND CHIMPANZEES
ACROSS MANY DIFFERENT
PROTEINS.
AS I WAS DOING THIS I
BEGAN TO GET FRUSTRATED
AGAIN.
BECAUSE I COULDN'T FIND
ANY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
HUMANS AND CHIMPANZEES
USING THIS APPROACH.
AND THAT WAS TRUE, NOT FOR
EVERY SINGLE PROTEIN, BUT
FOR THE GREAT
MAJORITY OF THEM.
WE AND CHIMPANZEES WERE
99% THE SAME IN OUR
STRUCTURAL GENES.
YET HERE WE ARE REMARKABLY
DIFFERENT AT THE LEVEL,
APPROPRIATELY AT THE LEVEL
OF FAMILIES IN OTHER WAYS.
SO WE THOUGHT
ABOUT IT TOGETHER.
ALLAN OF COURSE WAS
THE INSPIRATION.
AND WHAT CAME OUT OF THAT
WAS OUR WORK THAT WAS
PUBLISHED IN SCIENCE IN
1975 THAT POSTULATED THAT
THE CRITICAL DIFFERENCES
IN HUMAN AND CHIMPANZEE
EVOLUTION ARE NOT
DIFFERENCES IN THE PROTEIN
SEQUENCES OF GENES BUT ARE
DIFFERENCES IN THE TIMING
OF EXPRESSION OF THOSE
GENES AND IN THE WAYS IN
WHICH THEY ARE REGULATED.
THE PAPER THAT
MARY-CLAIRE AND ALLAN
WROTE MADE THE
COVER OF SCIENCE.
BUT SKEPTICS CONTINUED TO
QUESTION HOW TWO SPECIES
THAT LOOKED SO DIFFERENT
COULD BE SO SIMILAR IN
THEIR GENES.
MARY-CLAIRE KING: THIS
LAST YEAR THE CHIMPANZEE
GENOME WAS SEQUENCED.
THE HUMAN GENOME WAS
SEQUENCED SEVEN YEARS AGO.
AND THE CHIMPANZEE AND
THE HUMAN GENOMES WHEN
COMPARED BASE PAIR FOR
BASE PAIR ARE 98.8%
THE SAME.
SO, WE WERE RIGHT, ALLAN.
SANDRA HOLLIMAN: NOT
BEING SATISFIED WITH SORT
OF SHAKING UP THAT ASPECT
OF ANTHROPOLOGY, PROFESSOR
WILSON AND SOME OF HIS
COLLABORATORS INCLUDING
GRADUATE STUDENTS BEGAN
WORKING ON THE EVOLUTION
OF MODERN HUMAN
POPULATIONS.
AND THE WAY IN WHICH THAT
WAS APPROACHED WAS TO USE
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA.
IF YOU REMEMBER, THE
MITOCHONDRIA ARE THOSE
ORGANELLES THAT
HAVE THEIR OWN DNA.
IT'S INHERITED SEPARATELY
FROM THE DNA THAT'S IN THE
NUCLEUS OF THE CELL.
AND THAT'S ONLY INHERITED
FROM THE MOTHERS.
HE SAID "I'VE BEEN
READING ABOUT THIS
MOLECULE CALLED
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA.
IT SEEMS THAT IT HAS
SOME UNIQUE PROPERTIES.
IN OTHER WORDS, I THINK IF
WE CAN DO A COMPARATIVE
STUDY OF MITOCHONDRIAL
DNAS, WE'LL BE ABLE TO
REALLY SEE DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN HUMANS,
CHIMPANZEES AND GORILLAS."
THAT WAS ALWAYS
HIS FOCAL POINT.
MARY-CLAIRE CAN DO IT
BY LOOKING AT PROTEINS.
EVERYTHING HE HAD TRIED.
THE ONLY OTHER PLACE HE
HAD TO GO LEFT WAS TO GO
LOOK AT DNA.
MATTHEW GEORGE
CAME FROM ALABAMA.
HE WAS ONE OF DOZENS
OF GRADUATE STUDENTS
ATTRACTED TO THE WILSON
LAB IN THE 1980'S, HALF OF
THEM WERE WOMEN.
MATTHEW DID THE STUDY THAT
SHOWED MITOCHONDRIAL DNA
COULD DISCRIMINATE BETWEEN
CLOSELY RELATED MONKEYS.
ALLAN THEN ASKED ANOTHER
STUDENT FROM THE
ANTHROPOLOGY DEPARTMENT TO
SEE IF THIS SAME TECHNIQUE
COULD BE APPLIED
TO MODERN HUMANS.
THE TECHNOLOGY WAS THE
USE OF MITOCHONDRIAL DNA
TO TRACE GENEALOGIES.
AND YOU COULD GET A PURE
SOURCE OF THIS DNA.
IT WAS EASY TO STUDY
BECAUSE IT WAS SO SIMPLE
IN ITS TRANSMISSION,
MOTHER TO DAUGHTER,
TO SON.
AND BECAUSE IT APPEARED
NOT TO RECOMBINE; WHICH
WOULD MAKE IT MORE
INTERESTING TO A
GENETICIST BUT HARD FOR A
GENEALOGIST TO USE; IT WAS
REALLY THE IDEAL TOOL.
ALLAN HAD THE INSIGHT
RIGHT AWAY THAT THIS WAS
GOING TO BE A KEY TO
UNLOCKING HUMAN HISTORY.
IF YOU'RE GOING TO REALLY
DO A GOOD JOB DESCRIBING
HUMANS AS A SPECIES, YOU
HAD TO INCLUDE PEOPLE FROM
ALL CONTINENTS.
YOU HAD TO INCLUDE A TYPE
OF SAMPLING THAT WOULD NOT
BE BIASED.
WE HAD TO WORK
WITH WHOLE TISSUES.
A BLOOD SAMPLE WASN'T
SUFFICIENT TO GIVE US THE
AMOUNT OF PURIFIED
DNA WE NEEDED.
MATTHEW GEORGE: WELL
WHAT'S THE BEST WAY?
YOU CAN'T GO OUT AND CHOP
UP SOME LIVER, KIDNEY AND
SPLEEN. SO WE SAID "AH,
PLACENTA WOULD BE A
GOOD SOURCE FOR
THE MITOCHONDRIA."
REBECCA CANN: SO
BEGAN GOING TO LAMAZE
CLASSES, ASKING NEW MOMS
TO BE IF THEY WOULD
CONSIDER BEING PART OF A
STUDY THAT WANTED TO LOOK
AT DIVERSITY OF GENES
SPREAD BY WOMEN AROUND
THE WORLD.
AND WHEN THEY WENT INTO
LABOR I'D GET CALLED.
AND WE'D WAIT, AND AT THE
END THEY'D HAVE A HAPPY
SO WE WOULD RACE BACK
TO THE LAB AND START
ISOLATING DNA.
IN ALLAN'S LAB
BECKY CANN ANALYZED
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA FROM THE
PLACENTAS OF NEARLY 150
WOMEN SAMPLED FROM
EVERY CONTINENT.
THEIR MITOCHONDRIAL
LINEAGES INTERSECTED WITH
A COMMON ANCESTRAL
MOTHER IN AFRICA.
THEY ESTIMATED THAT SHE
HAD LIVED LY 150,000
YEARS AGO.
SANDRA HOLLIMAN: THIS
CONTINUES TO BE A VE,
VERY POWERL EXPLANATORY
HYPOTHESIS, ONE THAT ALSO
STILL ENGENDERS ITE A
BIT OF CONTROVERSY IN SOME
QUARTERS.
YOU KNOW, WE ALL ARE
AFRICAN BASICALLY.
YOU KNOW, OUR SPECIES
IS AN AFRICAN SPECIES.
AND ALL OF US WHO ARE
ALIVE TODAY DESCENDED FROM
THIS ONE WOMAN.
MATTHEW GEORGE: IT
WAS AS THING OF PRIDE.
YOU KNOW, IT WAS.... AS
A BLACK PERSON, YOU JUST
TAKE IT SO
PERSONALLY, YOU KNOW.
AND YOU HATE TO BE LIKE
THAT, BUT YOU ARE.
YOU KNOW, I MEAN, THE IDEA
THAT ALL OF MANKIND COULD
HAVE ORIGINATED
FROM AFRICA.
THE CONCEPT OF A
MITOCHONDRIAL EVE WAS, OR
A MITOCHONDRIAL ADAM FOR
THAT MATTER, WAS VERY
FOREIGN.
AND IT TOOK SEVERAL YEARS
AFTER BECKY'S PAPER WAS
PUBLISHED FOR EVOLUTIONARY
BIOLOGISTS TO COME TO
GRIPS WITH THE FACT THAT A
SINGLE INDIVIDUAL WAS IN
FACT THE ANCESTOR OF
ALL THE DIVERSITY OF
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA.
REBECCA CANN: IN MANY
CASES, PEOPLE WERE SO
AGHAST THAT THEY SAID "ONE
GENE, IT'S ONLY ONE GENE
AND IT CAN'T BE IMPORTANT.
BECAUSE YOU JUST TOLD ME
IT'S THERE, AND THOUSANDS
OF COPIES...
AND IT'S ONLY THE WOMAN.
IT'S ONLY THE
MATERNAL LINE."
SO THESE KINDS OF
ARGUMENTS WERE CONSTANTLY
THROWN AT ME.
AND I FELT LIKE WHAT I
MUST BE SAYING WAS SO
OUTRAGEOUS PEOPLE
WEREN'T EVEN LISTENING.
AND IT WAS A CONTRAST.
BECAUSE I HAD COLLEAGUES
IN THE LAB THAT WERE DOING
THE SAME THING WITH
BIRDS, WITH LIZARDS,
WITH MONKEYS.
AND PUBLISHING
SIMILAR PAPERS.
FISH.
AND NOBODY BATTED AN EYE.
AND AT THAT POINT I
REALIZED WE WEREN'T
ARGUING ABOUT HUMAN
GENETIC DIVERSITY, WE WERE
ARGUING ABOUT WHO
OWNED HUMAN TURF.
ALLAN WILSON: THE
CLOSER YOU GET TO THE
SOCIAL SCIENCES, THE
HARDER IT IS TO OVERTHROW
PREVIOUS POINTS OF VIEW.
IT CAN TAKE A WHOLE
GENERATION SOMETIMES
BEFORE OUTMODED WAYS OF
APPROACHING THE SUBJECT
GET OVERTHROWN.
DAVID WAKE: WITHIN THE
DISCIPLINE HE WAS BATTLING
AGAINST A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO WERE FRANKLY
THAT YOU COULD USE
BIOCHEMISTRY FOR
SYSTEMATIC OR EVOLUTIONARY
TAXONOMIC REASONS.
JIM PATTON: HIS STEP
INTO THE ISSUE ABOUT HUMAN
EVOLUTION AND THE OUT OF
AFRICA HYPOTHESIS WAS A
TOTAL REVERSAL OF
PREVIOUS IDEAS.
AND HE WAS JUST SIMPLY
UNAFRAID TO STEP BOLDLY
WHERE IN MANY RESPECTS
PEOPLE WOULD SAY HE DIDN'T
BELONG BECAUSE HE WASN'T
TRAINED INHOSE AREAS.
SANDRA HOLLIMAN:
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES, IF
YOU'RE GOING TO DEAL WITH
DNA, YOU'RE GOING TO DL
WITH THE LEGACY OF
PROFESSOR WILSON'S WORK.
REBECCA CANN:
ECOLOGISTS,
ORNITHOLOGISTS, REPTILE
SPECIALISTS, ALL THESE
PEOPLE SUDDENLY REALIZING
THE WORLD HAD CHANGED OUT
FROM UNDER THEM.
THEY WOULDN'T BE TAKEN
SERIOUSLY, IN ADDITIONO
HAVING ALL THAT HUGE BODY
OF KNOWLEDGE ABOUT THEIR
ORGANISM, IF THEY DIDN'T
KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT THE
GENE GENEALOGIES.
AXEL MEYER: ALLAN
ALWAYS HAD TWO KINDS OF
PEOPLE IN HIS LIFE.
HE HAD PEOPLE WHO WERE
OLOGISTS, WHO LIKED THE
ORGANISM.
ORNITHOLOGISTS WHO
LIKED THEIR BIRDS.
OR THEY LIKED THEIR
FISH, THE ICHTHYOLOGIST.
THE SPECIALIST IN
PARTICULAR GROUPS OF
ORGANISMS, MOSTLY ANIMALS.
AND THEN HE HAD ANOTHER
SET OF PEOPLE WHO
WERE "GENE JOCKEYS",
PEOPLE WHO MAY NOT KNOW
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A
ROBIN AND A FINCH BUT WHO
WOULD KNOW IN INTRICATE
DETAIL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
PARTICULAR MOLECULAR
TECHNIQUES.
AND IT WAS A BIG CHANGE
FOR ME TO COME FROM THE
ZOOLOGY DEPARTMENT IN
BERKELEY TO A BIOCHEMISTRY
DEPARTMENT, IN
PARTICULAR ALLAN'S LAB.
AND I CAME TO THE LAB
AT AN HISTORICALLY
UNIQUE TIME.
I CAME AT A TIME WHEN
PCR, THE POLYMERASE CHAIN
REACTION, WAS INVENTED.
AND OUR LAB WAS AMONG
THE FIRST TO USE PCR FOR
EVOLUTIONARY QUESTION.
STARTING WITH A TINY
FRAGMENT, YOU COULD MAKE
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
COPIES OF ANY PIECE OF DNA
VIRTUALLY AT WILL.
WITH EACH HEATING AND
COOLING CYCLE THE NUMBER
OF COPIES INCREASES
EXPONENTIALLY.
SOME OF ALLAN'S
PREVIOUS STUDENTS, SUCH AS
TOM WHITE, WERE AT THE
SEAT OF THE COMPANY WHERE
PCR WAS DEVELOPED.
SO WE GOT ONE OF THE VERY
FIRST MACHINES OUTSIDE
THE COMPANY.
WE HAD ALSO BUILT IN
ALLAN'S LAB OUR HOMEMADE
PCR MACHINE.
IT WAS ACTUALLY DONE WITH
VALVES FROM A WASHING
MACHINE, SO IT WOULD TAKE
COLD AND HOT WATER AND MIX
IT, SCANNED BY A COMPUTER.
AND IT WORKED, ALTHOUGH
IT FLOODED THE LAB QUITE
OFTEN IN THE NIGHT.
ALLAN WAS THE FIRST
PERSON TO HEAR ABOUT IN
THE POLYMERASE CHAIN
REACTION METHOD BEFORE THE
PAPER WAS ACTUALLY
PUBLISHED INTO SCIENCE IN
DECEMBER OF 1985.
THE METHOD MADE CERTAIN
QUESTIONS OR EXPERIMENTS
POSSIBLE THAT HAD
PREVIOUSLY BEEN
IMPOSSIBLE.
BUT IT WAS ASKING THE
IMPOSSIBLE QUESTIONS WHERE
ALLEN'S CONCEPTUAL
ABILITY CAME IN.
HE REALIZED, I THINK,
FASTER THAN ANYONE AND
STIMULATED SUCH A BROAD
GROUP OF PEOPLE IN HIS
LABORATORIES TO THINK
ABOUT APPLYING THE METHOD
TO DO EXPERIMENTS THAT
SIMPLY HAD BEEN IMPOSSIBLE
BEFORE.
SCOTT EDWARDS: THE
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION
WAS A REVOLUTION FOR
NATURAL SCIENCE.
IT ALLOWED RESEARCHERS TO
PLACE THE EVOLUTION OF
THEIR FAVORITE GROUP
ON A YARDSTICK.
WE COULD COUNT THE NUMBER
OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DNA
SEQUENCES BETWEEN TWO
INDIVIDUALS, BETWEEN TWO
SPECIES, AND THEREBY
CREATE A CALIBRATION FOR
AVIAN EVOLUTION.
AND IT WAS A
REMARKABLE TIME.
REALLY THE HOLY GRAIL
OF LOOKING AT GENETIC
VARIATION WITHIN SPECIES
WAS LAID IN ALLAN'S LAP.
TOM WHITE: ALLAN
IMMEDIATELY SAW THE
POTENTIAL OF THAT FOR
STUDYING THE RELATIONSHIP
OF EXTINCT ANIMALS, WHERE
SPECIMENS MIGHT ONLY STILL
EXIST IN A MUSEUM;
LIKE THE GUAGGA OR THE
MARSUPIAL WOLF OR OTHER
THINGS FROM THE AREA OF
THE WORLD IN WHICH HE'D
GROWN UP; BY USING THE PCR
METHOD TO STUDY WHAT'S
NOW CALLED ANCIENT DNA.
ANCIENT DNA IS THE
TARGET OF RESEARCHERS
EXCAVATING THE
BONES OF THE MOA.
UNTIL IT WAS HUNTED TO
EXTINCTION THE MOA WAS THE
WORLD'S LARGEST BIRD.
ALAN COOPER: AND ONE
OF MY KEY PROJECTS IS TO
STUDY THE DEMOGRAPHIC
HISTORY, THE POPULATION
HISTORY OF TWO SPECIES
OF MOA IN NEW ZEALAND.
AND THE REASON THAT
THEY'RE SO IMPORTANT IS
BECAUSE NEW ZEALAND ONLY
RECENTLY GOT COLONIZED BY
HUMANS, ABOUT 800,
900 YEARS AGO.
AND SO THEREFORE,
IF WE GET DNA
FROM A LARGE NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS IN THIS
POPULATION AND FOLLOW
THROUGH TIME HOW THE
GENETIC DIVERSITY CHANGES,
WE KNOW THAT THOSE
RESPONSES ARE JUST DUE
TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE.
AND SO WHAT WE'RE REALLY
DOING IS LOOKING HOW
CLIMATE CHANGE IS
AFFECTING ANIMALS IN THE
ABSENCE OF HUMANS.
SO IF WE GO BACK IN TIME,
THIRTY, FORTY THOUSAND
YEARS, AND GET A LARGE
NUMBER OF MOA SPECIMENS,
GET THE DNA OUT, CARBON
DATE ALL THE BONES, WE CAN
REALLY SEE WHAT CLIMATIC
CHANGE IS DOING TO LARGE
POPULATIONS OF ANIMALS.
AND THAT'S WHERE IT REALLY
APPEALED ABOUT ANCIENT DNA
TO ALLAN, WAS ACTUALLY
SEEING THE PROCESSES THAT
EVOLUTION IS WORKING BY.
YOU CAN EXTRAPOLATE FROM
MODERN DATA AND THE FOSSIL
RECORD, BUT YOU
ARE EXTRAPOLATING.
WITH THE ANCIENT DNA
YOU'RE SEEING, YOU'RE
ACTUALLY MEASURING.
YOU KNOW, 40,000 YEARS
AGO IT LOOKED LIKE THIS.
38,000 YEARS AGO HERE'S
ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, IT'S
CHANGED THIS MUCH.
WE CAN SEE BOTH
INDIVIDUALS AND HOW IT'S
RELATED AND THIS IS SORT
OF SPEED AND THE SITES
THAT ARE ACTUALLY
CHANGING.
YOU'RE REALLY WATCHING
EVOLUTION HAPPENING.
WHEN ALAN COOPER JOINED
THE WILSON LAB IN 1989 HE
BEGAN WORKING WITH A
SENIOR GRADUATE STUDENT,
SVANTE PAABO.
TODAY SVANTE RUNS HIS OWN
LAB AT LIEPZIG IN GERMANY.
IT'S THE WORLD'S FOREMOST
CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF
EVOLUTIONARY ANTHROPOLOGY.
SVANTE PAABO: WHAT
I WORKED ON REALLY
EXCLUSIVELY IN ALLAN'S
LAB, MORE OR LESS
EXCLUSIVELY, WAS THE
DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNIQUES
TO DO ANCIENT DNA.
SO THAT WAS SOMETHING I
HAD STARTED AS A GRADUATE
STUDENT IN SWEDEN.
AND THEN ALLAN HAD A LONG
INTEREST IN THAT AND HAD
WORKED ON THAT.
SO THAT SORT OF FUSED
THESE TWO DIRECTIONS
OF WORK.
AND THE PCR CAME ALONG AT
THAT TIME, AND THAT REALLY
OPENED UP THAT FIELD.
SO THAT ALLOWED US TO GO
AND DO THE MARSUPIAL WOLF
AND THE, GROUND SLOTHS
AND SO ON, EXTINCT
CREATURES.
THERE ARE FOUR LINES OF
WORK FROM THIS INSTITUTE
THAT WOULD
CONNECT TO ALLAN.
ONE IS A WORK OF HUMAN
POPULATION HISTORY THAT
MARK STONEKING DOES.
THAT SORT OF FOLLOWS THE
HISTORY OF HUMANS FROM
AFRICA OUT INTO THE WORLD,
INTO THE PACIFIC AND
EVENTUALLY TO NEW ZEALAND
BY GENETIC MARKERS.
ANOTHER LINE IS A
COMPARISON OF THE GENES IN
HUMANS, CHIMPANZEES AND
GORILLAS, THE GREAT APES.
WHERE LINDA VIGILANT DOES
MUCH OF THE SAME WORK THAT
SHE DID ON THE
POPULATION HISTORY OF
HUMANS IN ALLAN'S LAB,
NOW IN THE GREAT APES AND
COMPARING THEIR HISTORY
TO THE HISTORY OF US,
OF HUMANS. THEN THERE'S
THE QUEST, NOW WHAT SETS
US APART FROM THE
GREAT APES?
WHY ARE WE SO DIFFERENT,
ALTHOUGH ALLAN SHOWED THAT
WE ARE SO CLOSELY
RELATED IN OUR GENES?
AND THAT'S WORK THAT ONE
AT THAT TIME COULD NOT
REALLY TEST HIS IDEAS.
AND NOW HOWEVER WE
HAVE THE EXPERIMENTAL
POSSIBILITIES TO DO THAT.
AND THAT'S WORK THAT WE
ARE DOING HERE, COMPARING
THE GENE REGULATION
BETWEEN HUMANS AND THE
GREAT APES.
AND FINALLY THE FOURTH
STORY IS ANCIENT DNA.
SO THE RETRIEVAL OF DNA
FROM FOSSILS THAT YOU FIND
OF EXTINCT CREATURES SUCH
AS MAMMALS OR CAVE BEARS
AND OF NEANDERTHALS WHERE
WE ARE ABOUT TO LAUNCH A
GENOME PROJECT.
WE WOULD DETERMINE THE
ENTIRE GENOME OF A
NEANDERTHAL TO COMPARE
IT TO OUR GENOME AND THE
GENOME OF CHIMPANZEES.
TO BE ABLE TO SAY FOR
EVERY CHANGE, GENETIC
CHANGE THAT YOU HAVE
BETWEEN HUMANS AND
CHIMPANZEES, DO WE
SHARE THAT WITH THE
NEANDERTHALS?
IS IT AN OLD CHANGE BEFORE
WE DIVERGED FROM THE
NEANDERTHAL OR IS IT
A VERY RECENT ONE?
SO IF THE NEANDERTHAL
LOOKS LIKE THE CHIMP AND
THIS IS A CHANGE THAT WILL
HAPPEN WHEN MODERN HUMANS
APPEARED IN THE LAST FEW
HUNDRED THOUSAND YEARS.
ALLAN RETURNED TO NEW
ZEALAND FOR THE LAST TIME
IN 1989 TO BE HONORED
BY OTAGO UNIVERSITY.
ALLAN WILSON: I WAS A
FARM BOY IN SOUTH AUCKLAND
AND I WAS OFF TO DEVOTE MY
LIFE TO BECOMING A BETTER
FARMER.
THAT'S WHAT I TOLD MY
FATHER AS I LEFT THE FARM.
THERE HAD BEEN
MANY OTHER HONORS.
ALLAN WAS ELECTED TO THE
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS
AND SCIENCES AND TO THE
ROYAL SOCIETY IN LONDON.
IN 1991 HE DIED
FROM LEUKEMIA.
A DISEASE THAT IS NOW
EASIER TO DIAGNOSE AND TO
TREAT BECAUSE OF THE TOOLS
HIS METHODS MADE POSSIBLE.
NOT FAR FROM BERKELEY
ANOTHER OF HIS FORMER
STUDENTS EXPLORES THE
LINKS BETWEEN THE GENES WE
CARRY AND THE
DISEASES WE GET.
TOM WHITE: I THINK
ALLAN WOULD BE INTERESTED
IN ALL OF THE FINDINGS.
BECAUSE THE GENES WE FOUND
THAT OUR ASSOCIATED WITH
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE OR
PARKINSON'S, STROKE, HEART
ATTACKS, THE AUTOIMMUNE
DISEASES; THEY'RE ALL
TELLING US THAT THE
BIOLOGY WE HAVE BEEN
LEARNING THROUGHOUT OUR
CAREERS IS SUCH A SMALL
PART OF THE BIOLOGY THAT
ACTUALLY MAKES US WHAT
WE ARE.
THAT THERE WILL BE NOW
YEARS AND YEARS OF
FOLLOW-UP WORK TO TIE THE
ASSOCIATED GENES TO THE
FUNCTIONS THAT SHOW HOW
THEY ACTUALLCAUSE
THE DISEASE.
JIM PATTON: WELL A
HUNDRED YEARS FROM NOW
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO LOOK
BACK AT THE HISTORY OF OUR
SCIENCE AND THEY'RE GOING
TO POINT TO A RELATIVELY
SMALL NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO
REALLY MADE DIFFERENCES IN
THE PROJECTION
OF THAT SCIENCE.
AND ALLAN WILSON IS
POSSIBLY; I WON'T SAY THAT
HE IS; BUT HE'S POSSIBLY
ONE OF THOSE RELATIVELY
FEW INDIVIDUALS
THAT'LL BE POINTED TO.
REBECCA CANN: FOR ME,
ALLAN'S LEGACY IS A BASE
OF A LOVE OF NATURE, A
FASCINATION WITH UTILIZING
MODERN TECHNOLOGY TO
GET AT OLD QUESTIONS.
AND THAT MODERN
TECHNOLOGY HAS TO BE
LABORATORY-BASED, IT HAS
TO BE UNIVERSAL, IT HAS TO
BE IN A LANGUAGE WHERE I
CAN SHARE IT WITH
ANOTHER PERSON.
IT CAN BE INDEPENDENTLY
VERIFIED.
AND IT HAS TO
BE INTERESTING.
IT HAS TO BE SOMETHING
THAT STIMULATES PEOPLE TO
ASK QUESTIONS AND IT HAS
TO GIVE YOU A STORY TO
TELL THAT MAKES
CONNECTIONS WITH THEM.
SVANTE PAABO: HE ALWAYS
TRY TO BE QUANTITIVE AND
EXACT IN OTHER THINGS.
AND THAT TO MY MIND
I THINK THE FIELD OF
EVOLUTIONARY
BIOLOGY STILL NEEDS.
BUT ALLAN...
WE WOULD NOT BE WHERE WE
ARE TODAY IF ALLAN HADN'T
BROUGHT IT TO US.
LIFE IS NOT
A NARROW REALM.
AND HE PROVIDED
PROBES TO LIFE.
AND ONES WE DIDN'T
HAVE BEFORE.